[DOC-344] [2024.1] Improve queries with analyze page (#22355)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/query-1-performance/explain-analyze.md

title: Analyze queries with EXPLAIN
linkTitle: Analyze queries
description: Query optimization with EXPLAIN and EXPLAIN ANALYZE
headerTitle: Analyze queries with EXPLAIN
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: explain-analyze
    parent: query-tuning
    weight: 500
rightNav:
    hideH3: true
type: docs
---

The [EXPLAIN](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/perf_explain) and [EXPLAIN ANALYZE](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/perf_explain/#analyze) commands are used to analyze and display how the [query planner](../../../architecture/query-layer/#planner) has decided to [execute](../../../architecture/query-layer/#executor) a query along with actual runtime performance statistics. These commands provide valuable insights into how YugabyteDB processes a query and by analyzing this output, you can identify potential bottlenecks, such as inefficient index usage, excessive sorting or inefficient join strategy, and other performance issues. This information can guide you in optimizing queries, creating appropriate indexes, or restructuring the underlying data to improve query performance.

{{<note>}}

> The query is executed only when using _EXPLAIN ANALYZE_. With vanilla _EXPLAIN_ (i.e without _ANALYZE_), the output displays only estimates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query is executed only when using _EXPLAIN ANALYZE_. With vanilla _EXPLAIN_ (that is, without _ANALYZE_), the output displays only estimates.
```

{{</note>}}

## Anatomy of the output

![Anatomy of the output](/images/explore/query-plan-anatomy.png)

> The output is effectively the plan tree followed by a summary of timing and counters. Each line represents a step (a.k.a node) involved in processing the query. The topmost line shows the overall plan and its estimated cost. Subsequent indented lines detail sub-steps involved in the execution. The structure of this output can be complex but contains valuable information for understanding how YugbyteDB processes a query. Let's break down the typical structure of the EXPLAIN ANALYZE output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output is effectively the plan tree followed by a summary of timing and counters. Each line represents a step (a.k.a node) involved in processing the query. The top line shows the overall plan and its estimated cost. Subsequent indented lines detail sub-steps involved in the execution. The structure of this output can be complex but contains valuable information to understand how YugabyteDB processes a query. Let's break down the typical structure of the EXPLAIN ANALYZE output:
```

> - **Node Information**: Each line of the output represents a node in the query execution plan. The type of node and the operation it performs are typically indicated at the beginning of the line e.g., _Seq Scan_, _Index Scan_, _Nested Loop_, _Hash Join_, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Node Information**: Each line of the output represents a node in the query execution plan. The type of node and the operation it performs are typically indicated at the beginning of the line, for example, _Seq Scan_, _Index Scan_, _Nested Loop_, _Hash Join_, and so on.
```

- **Cost and Row Estimates**:

>     -   _cost_ attribute is the estimated cost of the node's operation according to YugbyteDB's query planner. This cost is based on factors like I/O operations, CPU usage, and memory requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _cost_ attribute is the estimated cost of the node's operation according to YugabyteDB's query planner. This cost is based on factors like I/O operations, CPU usage, and memory requirements.
```

    -   _rows_ attribute is the estimated number of rows that will be processed or returned by the node.
- **Actual Execution Statistics**:

>     -   _time_: The actual time taken to execute the operation represented by the node during query execution. This is represented as 2 parts as _T1..T2_ with T1 the time taken to return the first row and T2 the time taken to return the last row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _time_: The actual time taken to execute an operation represented by the node during query execution. This is represented in two parts as _T1..T2_ with T1 being the time taken to return the first row, and T2 the time taken to return the last row.
```

    -   _rows_: The actual number of rows processed or returned by the node during execution.
- **Other Attributes**: Some nodes may have additional attributes depending on the operation they perform. For example:
    -   _Filter_: Indicates a filtering operation.

>     -   _Join Type_: Specifies the type of join being performed (e.g., Nested Loop, Hash Join, Merge Join).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Join Type_: Specifies the type of join being performed (for example, Nested Loop, Hash Join, Merge Join).
```

    -   _Index Name_: If applicable, the name of the index being used.
    -   _Sort Key_: The key used for sorting if a sort operation is involved.

>     -   _Sort Method_: The sorting algorithm used (e.g, _quicksort_, _mergesort_ etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Sort Method_: The sorting algorithm used (for example, _quicksort_, _mergesort_, and so on.)
```

- **Timings**: At the end of the plan tree, YugabyteDB will add multiple time taken metrics when the [DIST](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/perf_explain/#dist) option is specified. These are aggregate times across all plan nodes. Some of them are,
    - _Planning Time_: The time taken in milliseconds for the [query planner](../../../architecture/query-layer/#planner) to design the plan tree. Usually this value is higher the first time a query is executed. During subsequent runs, this time will be low as the plans are cached and re-used.
    - _Execution Time_: The total time taken in milliseconds for the query to execute. This includes all table/index read/write times.
    - _Storage Read Execution Time_: The sum of all round-trip times taken to read tables and indexes.
    - _Storage Write Execution Time_: The sum of all round-trip times taken to flush the write requests to tables and indexes.
    - _Catalog Read Execution Time_: Time taken to read from the system catalog (typically during planning).
    - _Storage Execution Time_ : Sum of _Storage Read_, _Storage Write_ and _Catalog Read_  execution times.

>     - _Time_: The total time taken by the request from the view point of the client as reported by ysqlsh. This includes _Planning_ and _Execution_ times along with the the client to server latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - _Time_: The total time taken by the request from the view point of the client as reported by ysqlsh. This includes _Planning_ and _Execution_ times along with the client to server latency.
```

- **Distributed Storage Counters**: YugabyteDB adds specific counters related to the distributed execution of the query to the summary when the [DIST](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/perf_explain/#dist) option is specified. Some of them are:

>     -   _Storage Table Read Requests_: Number of RPC round-trips made to the local [YB-TServer](../../../architecture/yb-tserver) for main table scans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Storage Table Read Requests_: Number of RPC round-trips made to the local [YB-TServer](../../../architecture/yb-tserver) for main table scans.
```

    -   _Storage Table Rows Scanned_: The total number of rows visited in tables to identify the final resultset.
    -   _Storage Table Writes_ : Number of requests issued to the local [YB-TServer](../../../architecture/yb-tserver) to perform inserts/deletes/updates on a non-indexed table.

>     -   _Storage Index Rows Scanned_: The total number of rows visited in indexes to identify the final resultset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Storage Index Rows Scanned_: The total number of rows visited in indexes to identify the final result set.
```

    -   _Storage Index Writes_ : Number of requests issued to the local [YB-TServer](../../../architecture/yb-tserver) to perform inserts/deletes/updates on an index.

>     -   _Storage Read Requests_: The sum of number of Table Reads and Index Reads across all plan nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Storage Read Requests_: The sum of number of _table reads_ and _index reads_ across all plan nodes.
```

>     -   _Storage Rows Scanned_: Sum of _Storage Table/Index_ row counters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Storage Rows Scanned_: Sum of _Storage Table/Index_ row counters.
```

>     -   _Storage Write Requests_: Sum of all _Storage Table Writes_ and _Storage Index Writes_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Storage Write Requests_: Sum of all _Storage Table Writes_ and _Storage Index Writes_.
```

>     -   _Catalog Read Requests_: Number of requests to read catalog information from [YB-Master](../../../architecture/yb-master)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Catalog Read Requests_: Number of requests to read catalog information from [YB-Master](../../../architecture/yb-master).
```

>     -   _Catalog Write Requests_: Number of requests to write catalog information to [YB-Master](../../../architecture/yb-master)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   _Catalog Write Requests_: Number of requests to write catalog information to [YB-Master](../../../architecture/yb-master).
```

>     -    _Storage Flush Requests_: Number of times buffered writes have been flushed to the local [YB-TServer](../../../architecture/yb-tserver).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -    _Storage Flush Requests_: Number of times buffered writes have been flushed to the local [YB-TServer](../../../architecture/yb-tserver).
```

## Using explain

> Let us go over a few examples to understand how to improve query performance using output of the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. First let's set up a local cluster for testing out the examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us go over a few examples to understand how to improve query performance using output of the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. First, set up a local cluster for testing out the examples.
```

{{<setup/local status="no" dataplacement="no">}}

### Setup tables

> Let us create a key value table as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us create a key value table as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE kvstore (
    key VARCHAR,
    value VARCHAR,
    PRIMARY KEY(key)
);
```

> Now add 10,000 key-values into the tables as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add 10,000 key-values into the tables as follows:
```

```sql
SELECT setseed(0.5); -- to help generate the same random values

INSERT INTO kvstore(key, value)
        SELECT substr(md5(random()::text), 1, 7), substr(md5(random()::text), 1, 10)
        FROM generate_series(1,10000);

```

> Now, run the [ANALYZE](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/cmd_analyze/) command on the database for stats to be gathered for the query planner to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the [ANALYZE](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/cmd_analyze/) command on the database for stats to be gathered for the query planner to use.
```

```sql
ANALYZE kvstore;
```

## Speeding up lookups

Let's fetch the details of the movie `Matrix` from the movies table.
Now run `EXPLAIN` on a simple query to fetch a  from the `movies` table.

{{<note>}}

> In all the following example output, metrics/counters with value zero have been removed for brevity. We will also add `COSTS OFF` option as that shows just the estimated costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all the outputs of the following examples, metrics/counters with value zero have been removed for brevity. `COSTS OFF` option has also been added to shows just the estimated costs.
```

{{</note>}}

```sql
EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, DIST, COSTS OFF) select value from kvstore where key='cafe32c';
```

> You will see an output similar to,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see an output similar to the following:
```

```yaml{linenos=inline, .nocopy}
                                    QUERY PLAN
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Index Scan using kvstore_pkey on kvstore (actual time=1.087..1.090 rows=1 loops=1)
   Index Cond: ((key)::text = 'cafe32c'::text)
   Storage Table Read Requests: 1
   Storage Table Read Execution Time: 0.971 ms
   Storage Table Rows Scanned: 1
 Planning Time: 0.063 ms
 Execution Time: 1.150 ms
 Storage Read Requests: 1
 Storage Read Execution Time: 0.971 ms
 Storage Rows Scanned: 1
 Storage Execution Time: 0.971 ms
```

> From line 3, We can see that an index scan was done on the table (via `Index Scan`) using the primary key `kvstore_pkey` to retrive one row (via `rows=1`). The `Storage Rows Scanned: 1` says that only one row was looked up which says that this was an optimal execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From line 3, you can see that an index scan was done on the table (via `Index Scan`) using the primary key `kvstore_pkey` to retrive one row (via `rows=1`). The `Storage Rows Scanned: 1` indicates that as only one row was looked up, this was an optimal execution.
```

Now let's fetch the key for a given value.

```sql
EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, DIST, COSTS OFF) select * from kvstore where value='85d083991d';
```

> You will see an output similar to,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see an output similar to the following:
```

```yaml{linenos=inline, .nocopy}
                         QUERY PLAN
-------------------------------------------------------------------
 Seq Scan on kvstore (actual time=3.719..3.722 rows=1 loops=1)
   Storage Filter: ((value)::text = '85d083991d'::text)
   Storage Table Read Requests: 1
   Storage Table Read Execution Time: 3.623 ms
   Storage Table Rows Scanned: 10000
 Planning Time: 1.176 ms
 Execution Time: 3.771 ms
 Storage Read Requests: 1
 Storage Read Execution Time: 3.623 ms
 Storage Rows Scanned: 10000
 Catalog Read Requests: 1
 Catalog Read Execution Time: 0.963 ms
 Storage Execution Time: 4.586 ms
```

> Immediately from line 3, you can see that this was a sequential scan (via `Seq Scan`). The `actual rows=1` attribute says that only one row was returned, but `Storage Rows Scanned: 10000` on line 12 says that all the 10,000 rows in the table were looked up to find one row. The execution time `3.771 ms` hence was higher than the previous query. You can use this information to convert the sequential scan into an index scan by creating an index as,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Immediately from line 3, you can see that this was a sequential scan (via `Seq Scan`). The `actual rows=1` attribute indicates that only one row was returned, but `Storage Rows Scanned: 10000` on line 12 indicates that all the 10,000 rows in the table were looked up to find one row. So, the execution time `3.771 ms` was higher than the previous query. You can use this information to convert the sequential scan into an index scan by creating an index as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_value_1 ON kvstore(value);
```

> Now if you run the same fetch by value query, you should see an output similar to,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run the same fetch by value query, you should see an output similar to the following:
```

```yaml{linenos=inline, .nocopy}
# EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, DIST, COSTS OFF) select * from kvstore where value='85d083991d';
                                    QUERY PLAN
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Index Scan using idx_value_1 on kvstore (actual time=1.884..1.888 rows=1 loops=1)
   Index Cond: ((value)::text = '85d083991d'::text)
   Storage Table Read Requests: 1
   Storage Table Read Execution Time: 0.861 ms
   Storage Table Rows Scanned: 1
   Storage Index Read Requests: 1
   Storage Index Read Execution Time: 0.867 ms
   Storage Index Rows Scanned: 1
 Planning Time: 0.063 ms
 Execution Time: 1.934 ms
 Storage Read Requests: 2
 Storage Read Execution Time: 1.729 ms
 Storage Rows Scanned: 2
 Storage Execution Time: 1.729 ms
 Peak Memory Usage: 24 kB
```

> In this run, Index scan was used and the execution time has been lowered (`1.934 ms` - 40% improvement) . Only one row was returned (via `rows=1`), but two rows were scanned (`Storage Rows Scanned: 2`) as one row was looked up from the index (via `Storage Index Rows Scanned: 1`) and one row was looked up from the table (via `Storage Table Rows Scanned: 1`). This is because, the executor looked up the row for the matching value: `85d083991d` from the index but had to go to the main table to fetch the key, sa we have specified `SELECT *` in our query. Only the values are present in the index and not the keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this run, Index scan was used and the execution time has been lowered (`1.934 ms` - 40% improvement). Only one row was returned (via `rows=1`), but two rows were scanned (`Storage Rows Scanned: 2`) as one row was looked up from the index (via `Storage Index Rows Scanned: 1`) and one row was looked up from the table (via `Storage Table Rows Scanned: 1`). This is because, the executor looked up the row for the matching value: `85d083991d` from the index but had to go to the main table to fetch the key, as we have specified `SELECT *` in our query. Only the values are present in the index and not the keys.
```

> We can avoid this by including the `key` column in the index as,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can avoid this by including the `key` column in the index as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_value_2 ON kvstore(value) INCLUDE(key);
```

> Now if you run the same fetch by value query, you should see an output similar to,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run the same fetch by value query, you should see an output similar to the following:
```

```yaml{linenos=inline, .nocopy}
# EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, DIST, COSTS OFF) select * from kvstore where value='85d083991d';
                                       QUERY PLAN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Index Only Scan using idx_value_2 on kvstore (actual time=1.069..1.072 rows=1 loops=1)
   Index Cond: (value = '85d083991d'::text)
   Storage Index Read Requests: 1
   Storage Index Read Execution Time: 0.965 ms
   Storage Index Rows Scanned: 1
 Planning Time: 0.074 ms
 Execution Time: 1.117 ms
 Storage Read Requests: 1
 Storage Read Execution Time: 0.965 ms
 Storage Rows Scanned: 1
 Storage Execution Time: 0.965 ms
```

Notice that the operation has become an `Index Only Scan` instead of the `Index Scan` as before. Only one row has been scanned (via `Storage Rows Scanned: 1`) as only the index row was scanned (via `Storage Index Rows Scanned: 1`). The exection time has now been lowered to `1.117 ms`, a 40% improvement over previous execution.

## Optimizing for ordering

> Now let us fetch all the values starting with a prefix, say `ca`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's fetch all the values starting with a prefix, say `ca`.
```

```sql
EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, DIST, COSTS OFF) SELECT * FROM kvstore WHERE value LIKE 'ca%' ORDER BY VALUE;
```

> You should see an output similar to,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see an output similar to the following:
```

```yaml{linenos=inline, .nocopy}
                                 QUERY PLAN
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Sort (actual time=4.007..4.032 rows=41 loops=1)
   Sort Key: value
   Sort Method: quicksort  Memory: 28kB
   ->  Seq Scan on kvstore (actual time=3.924..3.957 rows=41 loops=1)
         Storage Filter: ((value)::text ~~ 'ca%'::text)
         Storage Table Read Requests: 1
         Storage Table Read Execution Time: 3.846 ms
         Storage Table Rows Scanned: 10000
 Planning Time: 1.119 ms
 Execution Time: 4.101 ms
 Storage Read Requests: 1
 Storage Read Execution Time: 3.846 ms
 Storage Rows Scanned: 10000
 Catalog Read Requests: 1
 Catalog Read Execution Time: 0.877 ms
 Storage Execution Time: 4.723 ms
```

> Just 41 rows were returned (`rows=41`) but a sequential scan (`Seq Scan on kvstore`) was performed on all the rows (`Storage Rows Scanned: 10000`). Also the data had to be sorted (via `Sort Method: quicksort`) on value (via `Sort Key: value`). We can improve this execution by modifying the above created index into a range index, so that we can avoid the sorting operation and reduce the number of rows scanned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only 41 rows were returned (`rows=41`) but a sequential scan (`Seq Scan on kvstore`) was performed on all the rows (`Storage Rows Scanned: 10000`). Also, the data had to be sorted (via `Sort Method: quicksort`) on value (via `Sort Key: value`). You can improve this execution by modifying the above created index into a range index, so that you can avoid the sorting operation, and reduce the number of rows scanned.
```

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_value_3 ON kvstore(value ASC) INCLUDE(key);
```

> Now if you run the same query, you should see,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you run the same query, you should see,
```

```yaml{linenos=inline, .nocopy}
# EXPLAIN (ANALYZE, DIST, COSTS OFF) SELECT * FROM kvstore WHERE value LIKE 'ca%' ORDER BY VALUE;
                                       QUERY PLAN
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Index Only Scan using idx_value_3 on kvstore (actual time=0.884..0.935 rows=41 loops=1)
   Index Cond: ((value >= 'ca'::text) AND (value < 'cb'::text))
   Storage Filter: ((value)::text ~~ 'ca%'::text)
   Storage Index Read Requests: 1
   Storage Index Read Execution Time: 0.792 ms
   Storage Index Rows Scanned: 41
 Planning Time: 4.290 ms
 Execution Time: 1.008 ms
 Storage Read Requests: 1
 Storage Read Execution Time: 0.792 ms
 Storage Rows Scanned: 41
 Catalog Read Execution Time: 3.824 ms
 Storage Execution Time: 4.616 ms
```

> Now, only 41 rows were scanned (via `Storage Rows Scanned: 41`) to retrieve 41 rows (via `rows=41`) and there was no sorting ionvolved as the data is stored sorted in the range index in `ASC` order. even though YugabyteDB has optimizations for reverse scans, if most of your queries are going to retrieve the data in `DESC` order, then it would be better to define the ordering as `DESC` when creating a range sharded table/index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, only 41 rows were scanned (via `Storage Rows Scanned: 41`) to retrieve 41 rows (via `rows=41`) and there was no sorting involved as the data is stored sorted in the range index in `ASC` order. Even though YugabyteDB has optimizations for reverse scans, if most of your queries are going to retrieve the data in `DESC` order, then it would be better to define the ordering as `DESC` when creating a range sharded table/index.
```
